At Psalm 133, verse 1, we read,
Look, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity.
This scripture is vividly seen when visiting the Scandinavia and Finland branches.
I had the privilege of serving these two branches as a headquarters representative
during the month of May 2018, along with my wife Susan.
We knew that these branches had undergone major changes in their territory assignments in recent years.
Both were merged with other branches that have different languages and cultures.
I was very anxious to see firsthand how the brothers were handling these challenges.
The former branches in Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden were merged to form the Scandinavia branch.
The branch facilities are located in Holbeck, which is about an hour outside of Copenhagen.
It is beautifully situated in a suburban community, and the grounds of the branch form a lovely garden.
During our visit, the weather was exceptionally fine, which is not typical for Scandinavia.
So all took advantage of the sunshine and warm weather.
But the warmth of the sunshine could not be outdone by the love shown by our brothers at the branch.
The Bethel family totals 92 full-time members, 47 are Danish-speaking, 17 speak Norwegian, and 28 speak Swedish.
I wondered how they carried out their work and especially their spiritual programs.
As it turns out, it is a mixture of all three languages.
For instance, at morning worship, the German might speak in Danish.
The opening prayer might be in Norwegian, and the commenters might give their comments in Swedish.
And every week there are pre-recorded comments from one of the remote translation offices, such as Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
In addition, the branch alternates conducting the Monday Night Watchtower study between Danish, Norwegian, or Swedish.
And the brothers are free to comment in their mother tongue.
Though all these languages are different from each other, there are similarities, and so for the most part they all can understand each other.
But to help the brothers communicate with each other, the brothers came up with a language manual that contains lists of common words and their meanings in each language.
In addition, the manual contains five commandments, such as do not speak fast, use good articulation, and smile while you speak.
This greatly helps in smoothing over any miscommunications.
For instance, the Danish word for kind is the Norwegian word for peculiar.
So by following these commandments, a Norwegian brother would not feel bad if his Danish brother were to tell him, you are a peculiar person.
The translation work for these languages takes place at remote translation offices or RTOs.
Each language RTO is located in their respective countries. The RTOs function much like a Bethel facility.
For the most part, meals are provided, but each cares for their own laundry and transportation.
We were grateful for the opportunity to visit the RTO in Malmo, Sweden, which is a short car ride from Denmark.
At the Swedish RTO, the workers live at a nearby apartment complex.
It's a busy place, since they not only translate into Swedish, but also translate into Swedish sign language and produce audio recordings.
The facilities are well used and a bit cramped for space. Nevertheless, there is a joyful spirit at the RTO, and the brothers there enjoy working with one another.
The use of technology plays a major role in caring for the work at Bethel, as well as in communicating throughout the branch territory.
This was well illustrated when giving a special talk to all congregations in Scandinavia.
The talk was streamed to congregations as far away as the north of Norway, to the south and Faroe Islands, as well as to Greenland.
All throughout Scandinavia, the brothers came together to hear and see the talk sing out joyfully to Jehovah.
Likewise in Finland, when visiting that country, I gave the same talk, and it too was streamed to Kingdom Halls all throughout their territory, including the former branch territories of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
These three branches had been merged with Finland in recent times.
The former branch facilities in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are being well used as RTOs, and to hold classes for school for Kingdom evangelizers, and school for circular recours and their wives.
Both branch facilities underwent some renovations to convert their former printaries into office space and a comfortable family lounge.
This space also provides a place for historical museums that tours can visit and learn about the history of the Kingdom work in these lands.
While visiting these branches, I wondered how those who had served for a number of years on the respective branch committees felt about the mergers.
The comments I received showed a tremendous depth of spirituality and faith in Jehovah and the direction he provides through his organization.
Consider Brother Lars Erick Erickson. He served on the branch committee in Sweden for 14 years.
How did he feel when the governing body informed the branch about the merger?
In one way, it came as a surprise for us, but in another way not, because the merging of branches had already started in other parts of the world.
I remember that we brought us in the former Swedish branch committee.
We joked and said that if something will take place in Scandinavia, the new branch office will be located in Sweden.
We also thought that only Norway and Sweden should be merged, but not so.
One brother from the former Norwegian branch committee, he called me and he couldn't understand why the new branch should be located in Denmark.
He said that you have already the needed space in Sweden, rooms and other things, and Denmark is small in comparison.
And I had to admit, I was surprised too.
We have learned an important lesson that Jehovah's ways are not always and his ways are higher than always.
Everything turned out very well. Right from the beginning there has been a wonderful cooperation in the family.
And we work together in peace and unity.
A few times, especially in the beginning, we reminded each other that it is not a Danish branch, it is not a Norwegian branch or a Swedish branch, it is a Scandinavian branch office.
In a similar vein, consider what Brother Yoni Palmu, a member of the Finland branch committee, noted about their merger.
Combining different countries, cultures and languages under one branch office seemed impossible five years ago when this project started.
However, we were confident that if the governing body had started such a project, our task was to figure out how to make it work well.
We started working and we can see that Jehovah has blessed this project.
We can now see how Jehovah's people are a united group and how we are like a big family in the territory that covers several countries.
It has also made us confident of the fact that if we are now already a united fine people, when the new world comes, we are prepared to live there and receive more blessings.
This project has clearly shown us that God's kingdom rules and that the governing body is under Christ's direction.
During my visit, it was common to hear comments from Bethelites and those working hard in the field that the mergers were the best thing that could have happened.
It has been a spiritually enriching experience for all. It has strengthened their faith in Jehovah and has increased their love for their brothers.
Along this line, consider what Brother Timo Kahnstein, a member of the Finland Branch Committee, said.
Well, a great spiritual blessing has been that this merger has brought us closer as Brotherhood.
Peter once asked Jesus, what will be the reward of following Jesus Christ?
And Jesus answered that the everlasting life, but in this period of time, the reward is brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers, spiritually speaking.
So, after this merger, we have gained so many brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers, so we have been richly rewarded.
Our trip to these branches was truly faith strengthening. It was a joy to see that despite the challenges that from a human standpoint are unsurmountable,
which Jehovah's help our brothers joyfully overcame them and are united in doing God's will.
Because of such unity, Jehovah has opened the door for large numbers of immigrants and refugees that speak a variety of languages.
Therefore, the Brotherhood in both Scandinavia and Finland has become quite diverse in languages as well as cultures.
Yes, it was truly a delight to see our brothers dwelling together in unity. No matter where we went, all the brothers wanted you to be sure of their warm love and brotherly affection.